
Glinda of Oz
by
L. Frank Baum

In which are related the Exciting Experiences of Princess
Ozma of Oz, and Dorothy, in their hazardous journey
to the home of the Flatheads, and to the Magic
Isle of the Skeezers, and how they were
rescued from dire peril by the
sorcery of Glinda the
Good

by L. FRANK BAUM
"Royal Historian of Oz"


This Book
is Dedicated to
My Son
Robert Stanton Baum



LIST OF CHAPTERS
1 The Call of Duty
2 Ozma and Dorothy
3 The Mist Maidens
4 The Magic Tent
5 The Magic Stairway
6 Flathead Mountain
7 The Magic Isle
8 Queen Coo-ee-oh
9 Lady Aurex
10 Under Water
11 The Conquest of the Skeezers
12 The Diamond Swan
13 The Alarm Bell
14 Ozma's Counsellors
15 The Great Sorceress
16 The Enchanted Fishes
17 Under the Great Dome
18 The Cleverness of Ervic
19 Red Reera, the Yookoohoo..
20 A Puzzling Problem
21 The Three Adepts
22 The Sunken Island
23 The Magic Words
24 Glinda's Triumph





Chapter One

The Call to Duty


Glinda, the good Sorceress of Oz, sat in the grand
court of her palace, surrounded by her maids of honor
-- a hundred of the most beautiful girls of the
Fairyland of Oz. The palace court was built of rare
marbles, exquisitely polished. Fountains tinkled
musically here and there; the vast colonnade, open to
the south, allowed the maidens, as they raised their
heads from their embroideries, to gaze upon a vista of
rose-hued fields and groves of trees bearing fruits or
laden with sweet-scented flowers. At times one of the
girls would start a song, the others joining in the
chorus, or one would rise and dance, gracefully swaying
to the music of a harp played by a companion. And then
Glinda smiled, glad to see her maids mixing play with
work.

Presently among the fields an object was seen moving,
threading the broad path that led to the castle gate.
Some of the girls looked upon this object enviously;
the Sorceress merely gave it a glance and nodded her
stately head as if pleased, for it meant the coming of
her friend and mistress -- the only one in all the land
that Glinda bowed to.

Then up the path trotted a wooden animal attached to
a red wagon, and as the quaint steed halted at the gate
there descended from the wagon two young girls, Ozma,
Ruler of Oz, and her companion, Princess Dorothy. Both
were dressed in simple white muslin gowns, and as they
ran up the marble steps of the palace they laughed and
chatted as gaily as if they were not the most important
persons in the world's loveliest fairyland.

The maids of honor had risen and stood with bowed
heads to greet the royal Ozma, while Glinda came
forward with outstretched arms to greet her guests.

"We've just come on a visit, you know," said Ozma.
"Both Dorothy and I were wondering how we should pass
the day when we happened to think we'd not been to your
Quadling Country for weeks, so we took the Sawhorse and
rode straight here."

"And we came so fast," added Dorothy, "that our hair
is blown all fuzzy, for the Sawhorse makes a wind of
his own. Usually it's a day's journey from the Em'rald
City, but I don't s'pose we were two hours on the way."

"You are most welcome," said Glinda the Sorceress,
and led them through the court to her magnificent
reception hall. Ozma took the arm of her hostess, but
Dorothy lagged behind, kissing some of the maids she
knew best, talking with others, and making them all
feel that she was their friend. When at last she joined
Glinda and Ozma in the reception hall, she found them
talking earnestly about the condition of the people,
and how to make them more happy and contented --
although they were already the happiest and most
contented folks in all the world.

This interested Ozma, of course, but it didn't
interest Dorothy very much, so the little girl ran over
to a big table on which was lying open Glinda's Great
Book of Records.

This Book is one of the greatest treasures in Oz, and
the Sorceress prizes it more highly than any of her
magical possessions. That is the reason it is firmly
attached to the big marble table by means of golden
chains, and whenever Glinda leaves home she locks the
Great Book together with five jeweled padlocks, and
carries the keys safely hidden in her bosom.

I do not suppose there is any magical thing in any
fairyland to compare with the Record Book, on the pages
of which are constantly being printed a record of every
event that happens in any part of the world, at exactly
the moment it happens. And the records are always
truthful, although sometimes they do not give as many
details as one could wish. But then, lots of things
happen, and so the records have to be brief or even
Glinda's Great Book could not hold them all.

Glinda looked at the records several times each day,
and Dorothy, whenever she visited the Sorceress, loved
to look in the Book and see what was happening
everywhere. Not much was recorded about the Land of Oz,
which is usually peaceful and uneventful, but today
Dorothy found something which interested her. Indeed,
the printed letters were appearing on the page even
while she looked.

"This is funny!" she exclaimed. "Did you know,
Ozma, that there were people in your Land of Oz
called Skeezers?"

"Yes," replied Ozma, coming to her side, "I know that
on Professor Wogglebug's Map of the Land of Oz there is
a place marked 'Skeezer,' but what the Skeezers are
like I do not know. No one I know has ever seen them or
heard of them. The Skeezer Country is 'way at the upper
edge of the Gillikin Country, with the sandy,
impassable desert on one side and the mountains of
Oogaboo on another side. That is a part of the Land of
Oz of which I know very little."

"I guess no one else knows much about it either,
unless it's the Skeezers themselves," remarked Dorothy.
"But the Book says: 'The Skeezers of Oz have declared
war on the Flatheads of Oz, and there is likely to be
fighting and much trouble as the result.'"

"Is that all the Book says?" asked Ozma.

"Every word," said Dorothy, and Ozma and Glinda both
looked at the Record and seemed surprised and
perplexed.

"Tell me, Glinda," said Ozma, "who are the
Flatheads?"

"I cannot, your Majesty," confessed the Sorceress.
"Until now I never have heard of them, nor have I ever
heard the Skeezers mentioned. In the faraway corners of
Oz are hidden many curious tribes of people, and those
who never leave their own countries and never are
visited by those from our favored part of Oz, naturally
are unknown to me. However, if you so desire, I can
learn through my arts of sorcery something of the
Skeezers and the Flatheads."

"I wish you would," answered Ozma seriously. "You
see, Glinda, if these are Oz people they are my
subjects and I cannot allow any wars or troubles in the
Land I rule, if I can possibly help it."

"Very well, your Majesty," said the Sorceress, "I
will try to get some information to guide you. Please
excuse me for a time, while I retire to my Room of
Magic and Sorcery."

"May I go with you?" asked Dorothy, eagerly.

"No, Princess," was the reply. "It would spoil the
charm to have anyone present."

So Glinda locked herself in her own Room of Magic and
Dorothy and Ozma waited patiently for her to come out
again.

In about an hour Glinda appeared, looking grave and
thoughtful.

"Your Majesty," she said to Ozma, "the Skeezers live
on a Magic Isle in a great lake. For that reason --
because the Skeezers deal in magic -- I can learn
little about them."

"Why, I didn't know there was a lake in that part of
Oz," exclaimed Ozma. "The map shows a river running
through the Skeezer Country, but no lake."

"That is because the person who made the map never
had visited that part of the country," explained the
Sorceress. "The lake surely is there, and in the lake
is an island -- a Magic Isle -- and on that island live
the people called the Skeezers."

"What are they like?" inquired the Ruler of Oz.

"My magic cannot tell me that," confessed Glinda,
"for the magic of the Skeezers prevents anyone outside
of their domain knowing anything about them."

"The Flatheads must know, if they're going to fight
the Skeezers," suggested Dorothy

"Perhaps so," Glinda replied, "but I can get little
information concerning the Flatheads, either. They are
people who inhabit a mountain just south of the Lake of
the Skeezers. The mountain has steep sides and a broad,
hollow top, like a basin, and in this basin the
Flatheads have their dwellings. They also are magic-
workers and usually keep to themselves and allow no one
from outside to visit them. I have learned that the
Flatheads number about one hundred people -- men, women
and children -- while the Skeezers number just one
hundred and one."

"What did they quarrel about, and why do they wish to
fight one another?" was Ozma's next question.

"I cannot tell your Majesty that," said Glinda.

"But see here!" cried Dorothy, "it's against the law
for anyone but Glinda and the Wizard to work magic in
the Land of Oz, so if these two strange people are
magic-makers they are breaking the law and ought to be
punished!" Ozma smiled upon her little friend.

"Those who do not know me or my laws," she said,
"cannot be expected to obey my laws. If we know nothing
of the Skeezers or the Flatheads, it is likely that
they know nothing of us."

"But they ought to know, Ozma, and we ought to know.
Who's going to tell them, and how are we going to make
them behave?"

"That," returned Ozma, "is what I am now considering.
What would you advise, Glinda?"

The Sorceress took a little time to consider this
question, before she made reply. Then she said: "Had
you not learned of the existence of the Flatheads and
the Skeezers, through my Book of Records, you would
never have worried about them or their quarrels. So, if
you pay no attention to these peoples, you may never
hear of them again."

"But that wouldn't be right," declared Ozma. "I am
Ruler of all the Land of Oz, which includes the
Gillikin Country, the Quadling Country, the Winkie
Country and the Munchkin Country, as well as the
Emerald City, and being the Princess of this fairyland
it is my duty to make all my people -- wherever they
may be -- happy and content and to settle their
disputes and keep them from quarreling. So, while the
Skeezers and Flatheads may not know me or that I am
their lawful Ruler, I now know that they inhabit my
kingdom and are my subjects, so I would not be doing my
duty if I kept away from them and allowed them to
fight."

"That's a fact, Ozma," commented Dorothy.
"You've got to go up to the Gillikin Country and make
these people behave themselves and make up their
quarrels. But how are you going to do it?"

"That is what is puzzling me also, your Majesty,"
said the Sorceress. "It may be dangerous for you to go
into those strange countries, where the people are
possibly fierce and warlike."

"I am not afraid," said Ozma, with a smile.

"'Tisn't a question of being 'fraid," argued Dorothy.
"Of course we know you're a fairy, and can't be killed
or hurt, and we know you've a lot of magic of your own
to help you. But, Ozma dear, in spite of all this
you've been in trouble before, on account of wicked
enemies, and it isn't right for the Ruler of all Oz to
put herself in danger."

"Perhaps I shall be in no danger at all," returned
Ozma, with a little laugh. "You mustn't imagine danger,
Dorothy, for one should only imagine nice things, and
we do not know that the Skeezers and Flatheads are
wicked people or my enemies. Perhaps they would be good
and listen to reason."

"Dorothy is right, your Majesty," asserted the
Sorceress. "It is true we know nothing of these faraway
subjects, except that they intend to fight one another,
and have a certain amount of magic power at their
command. Such folks do not like to submit to
interference and they are more likely to resent your
coming among them than to receive you kindly and
graciously, as is your due."

"If you had an army to take with you," added Dorothy,
"it wouldn't be so bad; but there isn't such a thing as
an army in all Oz."

"I have one soldier," said Ozma.

"Yes, the soldier with the green whiskers; but he's
dreadful 'fraid of his gun and never loads it. I'm sure
he'd run rather than fight. And one soldier, even if he
were brave, couldn't do much against two hundred and
one Flatheads and Skeezers."

"What then, my friends, would you suggest?" inquired
Ozma.

"I advise you to send the Wizard of Oz to them, and
let him inform them that it is against the laws of Oz
to fight, and that you command them to settle their
differences and become friends," proposed Glinda. "Let
the Wizard tell them they will be punished if they
refuse to obey the commands of the Princess of all the
Land of Oz."

Ozma shook her head, to indicate that the advice was
not to her satisfaction.

"If they refuse, what then?" she asked. "I should be
obliged to carry out my threat and punish them, and
that would be an unpleasant and difficult thing to do.
I am sure it would be better for me to go peacefully,
without an army and armed only with my authority as
Ruler, and plead with them to obey me. Then, if they
prove obstinate I could resort to other means to win
their obedience."

"It's a ticklish thing, anyhow you look at it,"
sighed Dorothy. "I'm sorry now that I noticed the
Record in the Great Book."

"But can't you realize, my dear, that I must do my
duty, now that I am aware of this trouble?" asked Ozma.
"I am fully determined to go at once to the Magic Isle
of the Skeezers and to the enchanted mountain of the
Flatheads, and prevent war and strife between their
inhabitants. The only question to decide is whether it
is better for me to go alone, or to assemble a party of
my friends and loyal supporters to accompany me."

"If you go I want to go, too," declared Dorothy.
"Whatever happens it's going to be fun -- 'cause all
excitement is fun -- and I wouldn't miss it for the
world!"

Neither Ozma nor Glinda paid any attention to this
statement, for they were gravely considering the
serious aspect of this proposed adventure.

"There are plenty of friends who would like to go
with you," said the Sorceress, "but none of them would
afford your Majesty any protection in case you were in
danger. You are yourself the most powerful fairy in Oz,
although both I and the Wizard have more varied arts of
magic at our command. However, you have one art that no
other in all the world can equal -- the art of winning
hearts and making people love to bow to your gracious
presence. For that reason I believe you can accomplish
more good alone than with a large number of subjects in
your train."

"I believe that also," agreed the Princess. "I shall
be quite able to take care of myself, you know, but
might not be able to protect others so well. I do not
look for opposition, however. I shall speak to these
people in kindly words and settle their dispute --
whatever it may be -- in a just manner."

"Aren't you going to take me?" pleaded Dorothy.
"You'll need some companion, Ozma."

The Princess smiled upon her little friend.

"I see no reason why you should not accompany me,"
was her reply. "Two girls are not very warlike and they
will not suspect us of being on any errand but a kindly
and peaceful one. But, in order to prevent war and
strife between these angry peoples, we must go to them
at once. Let us return immediately to the Emerald City
and prepare to start on our journey early tomorrow
morning."

Glinda was not quite satisfied with this plan, but
could not think of any better way to meet the problem.
She knew that Ozma, with all her gentleness and sweet
disposition, was accustomed to abide by any decision
she had made and could not easily be turned from her
purpose. Moreover she could see no great danger to the
fairy Ruler of Oz in the undertaking, even though the
unknown people she was to visit proved obstinate. But
Dorothy was not a fairy; she was a little girl who had
come from Kansas to live in the Land of Oz. Dorothy
might encounter dangers that to Ozma would be as
nothing but to an "Earth child" would be very serious.

The very fact that Dorothy lived in Oz, and had been
made a Princess by her friend Ozma, prevented her from
being killed or suffering any great bodily pain as long
as she lived in that fairyland. She could not grow big,
either, and would always remain the same little girl
who had come to Oz, unless in some way she left that
fairyland or was spirited away from it. But Dorothy was
a mortal, nevertheless, and might possibly be
destroyed, or hidden where none of her friends could
ever find her. She could, for instance be cut into
pieces, and the pieces, while still alive and free from
pain, could be widely scattered; or she might be buried
deep underground or "destroyed" in other ways by evil
magicians, were she not properly protected. These facts
Glinda was considering while she paced with stately
tread her marble hall.

Finally the good Sorceress paused and drew a ring
from her finger, handing it to Dorothy.

"Wear this ring constantly until your return," she
said to the girl. "If serious danger threatens you,
turn the ring around on your finger once to the right
and another turn to the left. That will ring the alarm
bell in my palace and I will at once come to your
rescue. But do not use the ring unless you are actually
in danger of destruction. While you remain with
Princess Ozma I believe she will be able to protect you
from all lesser ills."

"Thank you, Glinda," responded Dorothy gratefully, as
she placed the ring on her finger. "I'm going to wear
my Magic Belt which I took from the Nome King, too, so
I guess I'll be safe from anything the Skeezers and
Flatheads try to do to me."

Ozma had many arrangements to make before she could
leave her throne and her palace in the Emerald City,
even for a trip of a few days, so she bade goodbye to
Glinda and with Dorothy climbed into the Red Wagon. A
word to the wooden Sawhorse started that astonishing
creature on the return journey, and so swiftly did he
run that Dorothy was unable to talk or do anything but
hold tight to her seat all the way back to the Emerald
City.




Chapter Two

Ozma and Dorothy



Residing in Ozma's palace at this time was a live
Scarecrow, a most remarkable and intelligent creature
who had once ruled the Land of Oz for a brief period
and was much loved and respected by all the people.
Once a Munchkin farmer had stuffed an old suit of
clothes with straw and put stuffed boots on the feet
and used a pair of stuffed cotton gloves for hands. The
head of the Scarecrow was a stuffed sack fastened to
the body, with eyes, nose, mouth and ears painted on
the sack. When a hat had been put on the head, the
thing was a good imitation of a man. The farmer placed
the Scarecrow on a pole in his cornfield and it came to
life in a curious manner. Dorothy, who was passing by
the field, was hailed by the live Scarecrow and lifted
him off his pole. He then went with her to the Emerald
City, where the Wizard of Oz gave him some excellent
brains, and the Scarecrow soon became an important
personage.

Ozma considered the Scarecrow one of her best friends
and most loyal subjects, so the morning after her visit
to Glinda she asked him to take her place as Ruler of
the Land of Oz while she was absent on a journey, and
the Scarecrow at once consented without asking any
questions.

Ozma had warned Dorothy to keep their journey a
secret and say nothing to anyone about the Skeezers and
Flatheads until their return, and Dorothy promised to
obey. She longed to tell her girl friends, tiny Trot
and Betsy Bobbin, of the adventure they were
undertaking, but refrained from saying a word on the
subject although both these girls lived with her in
Ozma's palace.

Indeed, only Glinda the Sorceress knew they were
going, until after they had gone, and even the
Sorceress didn't know what their errand might be.

Princess Ozma took the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon,
although she was not sure there was a wagon road all
the way to the Lake of the Skeezers. The Land of Oz is
a pretty big place, surrounded on all sides by a Deadly
Desert which it is impossible to cross, and the Skeezer
Country, according to the map, was in the farthest
northwestern part of Oz, bordering on the north desert.
As the Emerald City was exactly in the center of Oz, it
was no small journey from there to the Skeezers.

Around the Emerald City the country is thickly
settled in every direction, but the farther away you
get from the city the fewer people there are, until
those parts that border on the desert have small
populations. Also those faraway sections are little
known to the Oz people, except in the south, where
Glinda lives and where Dorothy has often wandered on
trips of exploration.

The least known of all is the Gillikin Country, which
harbors many strange bands of people among its
mountains and valleys and forests and streams, and Ozma
was now bound for the most distant part of the Gillikin
Country.

"I am really sorry," said Ozma to Dorothy, as they
rode away in the Red Wagon, "not to know more about the
wonderful Land I rule. It is my duty to be acquainted
with every tribe of people and every strange and hidden
country in all Oz, but I am kept so busy at my palace
making laws and planning for the comforts of those who
live near the Emerald City, that I do not often find
time to make long journeys."

"Well," replied Dorothy, "we'll prob'bly find out a
lot on this trip, and we'll learn all about the
Skeezers and Flatheads, anyhow. Time doesn't make much
diff'rence in the Land of Oz, 'cause we don't grow up,
or get old, or become sick and die, as they do other
places; so, if we explore one place at a time, we'll
by-an'-by know all about every nook and corner in Oz."

Dorothy wore around her waist the Nome King's Magic
Belt, which protected her from harm, and the Magic Ring
which Glinda had given her was on her finger. Ozma had
merely slipped a small silver wand into the bosom of
her gown, for fairies do not use chemicals and herbs
and the tools of wizards and sorcerers to perform their
magic. The Silver Wand was Ozma's one weapon of offense
and defense and by its use she could accomplish many
things.

They had left the Emerald City just at sunrise and
the Sawhorse traveled very swiftly over the roads
towards the north, but in a few hours the wooden animal
had to slacken his pace because the farm houses had
become few and far between and often there were no
paths at all in the direction they wished to follow. At
such times they crossed the fields, avoiding groups of
trees and fording the streams and rivulets whenever
they came to them. But finally they reached a broad
hillside closely covered with scrubby brush, through
which the wagon could not pass.

"It will be difficult even for you and me to get
through without tearing our dresses," said Ozma, "so we
must leave the Sawhorse and the Wagon here until our
return."

"That's all right," Dorothy replied, "I'm tired
riding, anyhow. Do you s'pose, Ozma, we're anywhere
near the Skeezer Country?"

"I cannot tell, Dorothy dear, but I know we've been
going in the right direction, so we are sure to find it
in time."

The scrubby brush was almost like a grove of small
trees, for it reached as high as the heads of the two
girls, neither of whom was very tall. They were obliged
to thread their way in and out, until Dorothy was
afraid they would get lost, and finally they were
halted by a curious thing that barred their further
progress. It was a huge web -- as if woven by gigantic
spiders -- and the delicate, lacy film was fastened
stoutly to the branches of the bushes and continued to
the right and left in the form of a half circle. The
threads of this web were of a brilliant purple color
and woven into numerous artistic patterns, but it
reached from the ground to branches above the heads of
the girls and formed a sort of fence that hedged them
in.

"It doesn't look very strong, though," said Dorothy.
"I wonder if we couldn't break through." She tried but
found the web stronger than it seemed. All her efforts
could not break a single thread.

"We must go back, I think, and try to get around this
peculiar web," Ozma decided.

So they turned to the right and, following the web
found that it seemed to spread in a regular circle. On
and on they went until finally Ozma said they had
returned to the exact spot from which they had started.
"Here is a handkerchief you dropped when we were here
before," she said to Dorothy.

"In that case, they must have built the web behind
us, after we walked into the trap," exclaimed the
little girl.

"True," agreed Ozma, "an enemy has tried to imprison
us."

"And they did it, too," said Dorothy. "I wonder who
it was."

"It's a spider-web, I'm quite sure," returned Ozma,
"but it must be the work of enormous spiders."

"Quite right!" cried a voice behind them. Turning
quickly around they beheld a huge purple spider sitting
not two yards away and regarding them with its small
bright eyes.

Then there crawled from the bushes a dozen more great
purple spiders, which saluted the first one and said:

"The web is finished, O King, and the strangers are
our prisoners."

Dorothy did not like the looks of these spiders at
all. They had big heads, sharp claws, small eyes and
fuzzy hair all over their purple bodies.

"They look wicked," she whispered to Ozma. "What
shall we do?"

Ozma gazed upon the spiders with a serious face.

"What is your object in making us prisoners?" she
inquired.

"We need someone to keep house for us," answered the
Spider King. "There is sweeping and dusting to be done,
and polishing and washing of dishes, and that is work
my people dislike to do. So we decided that if any
strangers came our way we would capture them and make
them our servants."

"I am Princess Ozma, Ruler of all Oz," said the girl
with dignity.

"Well, I am King of all Spiders," was the reply, "and
that makes me your master. Come with me to my palace
and I will instruct you in your work."

"I won't," said Dorothy indignantly. "We won't have
anything to do with you."

"We'll see about that," returned the Spider in a
severe tone, and the next instant he made a dive
straight at Dorothy, opening the claws in his legs as
if to grab and pinch her with the sharp points. But the
girl was wearing her Magic Belt and was not harmed. The
Spider King could not even touch her. He turned swiftly
and made a dash at Ozma, but she held her Magic Wand
over his head and the monster recoiled as if it had
been struck.

"You'd better let us go," Dorothy advised him, "for
you see you can't hurt us."

"So I see," returned the Spider King angrily. "Your
magic is greater than mine. But I'll not help you to
escape. If you can break the magic web my people have
woven you may go; if not you must stay here and
starve." With that the Spider King uttered a peculiar
whistle and all the spiders disappeared.

"There is more magic in my fairyland than I dreamed
of," remarked the beautiful Ozma, with a sigh of regret.
"It seems that my laws have not been obeyed, for even
these monstrous spiders defy me by means of Magic."

"Never mind that now," said Dorothy; "let's see what
we can do to get out of this trap."

They now examined the web with great care and were
amazed at its strength. Although finer than the finest
silken hairs, it resisted all their efforts to work
through, even though both girls threw all their weight
against it.

"We must find some instrument which will cut the
threads of the web," said Ozma, finally. "Let us look
about for such a tool."

So they wandered among the bushes and finally came to
a shallow pool of water, formed by a small bubbling
spring. Dorothy stooped to get a drink and discovered
in the water a green crab, about as big as her hand.
The crab had two big, sharp claws, and as soon as
Dorothy saw them she had an idea that those claws could
save them.

"Come out of the water," she called to the crab; "I
want to talk to you."

Rather lazily the crab rose to the surface and caught
hold of a bit of rock. With his head above the water he
said in a cross voice:

"What do you want?"

"We want you to cut the web of the purple spiders
with your claws, so we can get through it," answered
Dorothy. "You can do that, can't you?"

"I suppose so," replied the crab. "But if I do what
will you give me?"

"What do you wish?" Ozma inquired.

"I wish to be white, instead of green," said the
crab. "Green crabs are very common, and white ones are
rare; besides the purple spiders, which infest this
hillside, are afraid of white crabs. Could you make me
white if I should agree to cut the web for you?"

"Yes," said Ozma, "I can do that easily. And, so you
may know I am speaking the truth, I will change your
color now."

She waved her silver wand over the pool and the crab
instantly became snow-white -- all except his eyes,
which remained black. The creature saw his reflection
in the water and was so delighted that he at once
climbed out of the pool and began moving slowly toward
the web, by backing away from the pool. He moved so
very slowly that Dorothy cried out impatiently: "Dear
me, this will never do!" Caching the crab in her hands
she ran with him to the web.

She had to hold him up even then, so he could reach
with his claws strand after strand of the filmy purple
web, which he was able to sever with one nip.

When enough of the web had been cut to allow them to
pass, Dorothy ran back to the pool and placed the white
crab in the water, after which she rejoined Ozma. They
were just in time to escape through the web, for
several of the purple spiders now appeared, having
discovered that their web had been cut, and had the
girls not rushed through the opening the spiders would
have quickly repaired the cuts and again imprisoned
them.

Ozma and Dorothy ran as fast as they could and
although the angry spiders threw a number of strands of
web after them, hoping to lasso them or entangle them
in the coils, they managed to escape and clamber to the
top of the hill.




Chapter Three

The Mist Maidens



From the top of the hill Ozma and Dorothy looked down
into the valley beyond and were surprised to find it
filled with a floating mist that was as dense as smoke.
Nothing in the valley was visible except these rolling
waves of mist, but beyond, on the other side, rose a
grassy hill that appeared quite beautiful.

"Well," said Dorothy, "what are we to do, Ozma? Walk
down into that thick fog, an' prob'bly get lost in it,
or wait till it clears away?"

"I'm not sure it will clear away, however long we
wait," replied Ozma, doubtfully. "If we wish to get on,
I think we must venture into the mist."

"But we can't see where we're going, or what we're
stepping on," protested Dorothy. "There may be
dreadful things mixed up in that fog, an' I'm scared
just to think of wading into it."

Even Ozma seemed to hesitate. She was silent and
thoughtful for a little while, looking at the rolling
drifts that were so gray and forbidding. Finally she
said:

"I believe this is a Mist Valley, where these moist
clouds always remain, for even the sunshine above does
not drive them away. Therefore the Mist Maids must live
here, and they are fairies and should answer my call."

She placed her two hands before her mouth, forming a
hollow with them, and uttered a clear, thrilling, bird-
like cry. It floated far out over the mist waves and
presently was answered by a similar sound, as of a far-
off echo.

Dorothy was much impressed. She had seen many strange
things since coming to this fairy country, but here was
a new experience. At ordinary times Ozma was just like
any little girl one might chance to meet -- simple,
merry, lovable as could be -- yet with a certain
reserve that lent her dignity in her most joyous moods.
There were times, however, when seated on her throne
and commanding her subjects, or when her fairy powers
were called into use, when Dorothy and all others about
her stood in awe of their lovely girl Ruler and
realized her superiority.

Ozma waited. Presently out from the billows rose
beautiful forms, clothed in fleecy, trailing garments
of gray that could scarcely be distinguished from the
mist. Their hair was mist-color, too; only their
gleaming arms and sweet, pallid faces proved they were
living, intelligent creatures answering the call of a
sister fairy.

Like sea nymphs they rested on the bosom of the
clouds, their eyes turned questioningly upon the two
girls who stood upon the bank. One came quite near and
to her Ozma said:

"Will you please take us to the opposite hillside? We
are afraid to venture into the mist. I am Princess Ozma
of Oz, and this is my friend Dorothy, a Princess of
Oz."

The Mist Maids came nearer, holding out their arms.
Without hesitation Ozma advanced and allowed them to
embrace her and Dorothy plucked up courage to follow.
Very gently the Mist Maids held them. Dorothy thought
the arms were cold and misty -- they didn't seem real
at all -- yet they supported the two girls above the
surface of the billows and floated with them so swiftly
to the green hillside opposite that the girls were
astonished to find themselves set upon the grass before
they realized they had fairly started.

"Thank you!" said Ozma gratefully, and Dorothy also
added her thanks for the service.

The Mist Maids made no answer, but they smiled and
waved their hands in good-bye as again they floated out
into the mist and disappeared from view.




Chapter Four

The Magic Tent


"Well," said Dorothy with a laugh, "that was easier
than I expected. It's worth while, sometimes, to be a
real fairy. But I wouldn't like to be that kind, and
live in a dreadful fog all the time."

They now climbed the bank and found before them a
delightful plain that spread for miles in all
directions. Fragrant wild flowers were scattered
throughout the grass; there were bushes bearing lovely
blossoms and luscious fruits; now and then a group of
stately trees added to the beauty of the landscape. But
there were no dwellings or signs of life.

The farther side of the plain was bordered by a row
of palms, and just in front of the palms rose a queerly
shaped hill that towered above the plain like a
mountain. The sides of this hill were straight up and
down; it was oblong in shape and the top seemed flat
and level.

"Oh, ho!" cried Dorothy; "I'll bet that's the
mountain Glinda told us of, where the Flatheads live."

"If it is," replied Ozma, "the Lake of the Skeezers
must be just beyond the line of palm trees. Can you
walk that far, Dorothy?"

"Of course, in time," was the prompt answer. "I'm
sorry we had to leave the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon
behind us, for they'd come in handy just now; but with
the end of our journey in sight a tramp across these
pretty green fields won't tire us a bit."

It was a longer tramp than they suspected, however,
and night overtook them before they could reach the
flat mountain. So Ozma proposed they camp for the night
and Dorothy was quite ready to approve. She didn't like
to admit to her friend she was tired, but she told
herself that her legs "had prickers in 'em," meaning
they had begun to ache.

Usually when Dorothy started on a journey of
exploration or adventure, she carried with her a basket
of food, and other things that a traveler in a strange
country might require, but to go away with Ozma was
quite a different thing, as experience had taught her.
The fairy Ruler of Oz only needed her silver wand --
tipped at one end with a great sparkling emerald -- to
provide through its magic all that they might need.
Therefore Ozma, having halted with her companion and
selected a smooth, grassy spot on the plain, waved her
wand in graceful curves and chanted some mystic words
in her sweet voice, and in an instant a handsome tent
appeared before them. The canvas was striped purple and
white, and from the center pole fluttered the royal
banner of Oz.

"Come, dear," said Ozma, taking Dorothy's hand, "I am
hungry and I'm sure you must be also; so let us go in
and have our feast."

On entering the tent they found a table set for two,
with snowy linen, bright silver and sparkling
glassware, a vase of roses in the center and many
dishes of delicious food, some smoking hot, waiting to
satisfy their hunger. Also, on either side of the tent
were beds, with satin sheets, warm blankets and pillows
filled with swansdown. There were chairs, too, and
tall lamps that lighted the interior of the tent with a
soft, rosy glow.

Dorothy, resting herself at her fairy friend's
command, and eating her dinner with unusual enjoyment,
thought of the wonders of magic. If one were a fairy
and knew the secret laws of nature and the mystic words
and ceremonies that commanded those laws, then a simple
wave of a silver wand would produce instantly all that
men work hard and anxiously for through weary years.
And Dorothy wished in her kindly, innocent heart, that
all men and women could be fairies with silver wands,
and satisfy all their needs without so much work and
worry, for then, she imagined, they would have all
their working hours to be happy in. But Ozma, looking
into her friend's face and reading those thoughts, gave
a laugh and said:

"No, no, Dorothy, that wouldn't do at all. Instead of
happiness your plan would bring weariness to the world.
If every one could wave a wand and have his wants
fulfilled there would be little to wish for. There
would be no eager striving to obtain the difficult, for
nothing would then be difficult, and the pleasure of
earning something longed for, and only to be secured by
hard work and careful thought, would be utterly lost.
There would be nothing to do you see, and no interest
in life and in our fellow creatures. That is all that
makes life worth our while -- to do good deeds and to
help those less fortunate than ourselves."

"Well, you're a fairy, Ozma. Aren't you happy?" asked
Dorothy

"Yes, dear, because I can use my fairy powers to make
others happy. Had I no kingdom to rule, and no subjects
to look after, I would be miserable. Also, you must
realize that while I am a more powerful fairy than any
other inhabitant of Oz, I am not as powerful as Glinda
the Sorceress, who has studied many arts of magic that
I know nothing of. Even the little Wizard of Oz can do
some things I am unable to accomplish, while I can
accomplish things unknown to the Wizard. This is to
explain that I'm not all-powerful, by any means. My
magic is simply fairy magic, and not sorcery or
wizardry."

"All the same," said Dorothy, "I'm mighty glad you
could make this tent appear, with our dinners and beds
all ready for us."

Ozma smiled.

"Yes, it is indeed wonderful," she agreed. "Not all
fairies know that sort of magic, but some fairies can
do magic that fills me with astonishment. I think that
is what makes us modest and unassuming -- the fact that
our magic arts are divided, some being given each of
us. I'm glad I don't know everything, Dorothy, and that
there still are things in both nature and in wit for me
to marvel at."

Dorothy couldn't quite understand this, so she said
nothing more on the subject and presently had a new
reason to marvel. For when they had quite finished
their meal table and contents disappeared in a flash.

"No dishes to wash, Ozma!" she said with a laugh. "I
guess you'd make a lot of folks happy if you could
teach 'em just that one trick."

For an hour Ozma told stories, and talked with
Dorothy about various people in whom they were
interested. And then it was bedtime, and they undressed
and crept into their soft beds and fell asleep almost
as soon as their heads touched their pillows.




Chapter Five

The Magic Stairway



The flat mountain looked much nearer in the clear
light of the morning sun, but Dorothy and Ozma knew
there was a long tramp before them, even yet. They
finished dressing only to find a warm, delicious
breakfast awaiting them, and having eaten they left the
tent and started toward the mountain which was their
first goal. After going a little way Dorothy looked
back and found that the fairy tent had entirely
disappeared. She was not surprised, for she knew this
would happen.

"Can't your magic give us a horse an' wagon, or an
automobile?" inquired Dorothy.

"No, dear; I'm sorry that such magic is beyond my
power," confessed her fairy friend.

"Perhaps Glinda could," said Dorothy thoughtfully.

"Glinda has a stork chariot that carries her through
the air," said Ozma, "but even our great Sorceress
cannot conjure up other modes of travel. Don't forget
what I told you last night, that no one is powerful
enough to do everything."

"Well, I s'pose I ought to know that, having lived so
long in the Land of Oz," replied Dorothy; "but I can't
do any magic at all, an' so I can't figure out e'zactly
how you an' Glinda an' the Wizard do it."

"Don't try," laughed Ozma. "But you have at least one
magical art, Dorothy: you know the trick of winning all
hearts."

"No, I don't," said Dorothy earnestly. "If I really
can do it, Ozma, I am sure I don't know how I do it."

It took them a good two hours to reach the foot of
the round, flat mountain, and then they found the
sides so steep that they were like the wall of a house.

"Even my purple kitten couldn't climb 'em," remarked
Dorothy, gazing upward.

"But there is some way for the Flatheads to get down
and up again," declared Ozma; "otherwise they couldn't
make war with the Skeezers, or even meet them and
quarrel with them."

"That's so, Ozma. Let's walk around a ways; perhaps
we'll find a ladder or something."

They walked quite a distance, for it was a big
mountain, and as they circled around it and came to the
side that faced the palm trees, they suddenly
discovered an entrance way cut out of the rock wall.
This entrance was arched overhead and not very deep
because it merely led to a short flight of stone
stairs.

"Oh, we've found a way to the top at last," announced
Ozma, and the two girls turned and walked straight
toward the entrance. Suddenly they bumped against
something and stood still, unable to proceed farther.

"Dear me!" exclaimed Dorothy, rubbing her nose, which
had struck something hard, although she could not see
what it was; "this isn't as easy as it looks. What has
stopped us, Ozma? Is it magic of some sort?"

Ozma was feeling around, her bands outstretched
before her.

"Yes, dear, it is magic," she replied. "The Flatheads
had to have a way from their mountain top from the
plain below, but to prevent enemies from rushing up the
stairs to conquer them, they have built, at a small
distance before the entrance a wall of solid stone, the
stones being held in place by cement, and then they
made the wall invisible."

"I wonder why they did that?" mused Dorothy. "A wall
would keep folks out anyhow, whether it could be seen
or not, so there wasn't any use making it invisible.
Seems to me it would have been better to have left it
solid, for then no one would have seen the entrance
behind it. Now anybody can see the entrance, as we did.
And prob'bly anybody that tries to go up the stairs
gets bumped, as we did."

Ozma made no reply at once. Her face was grave and
thoughtful.

"I think I know the reason for making the wall
invisible," she said after a while. "The Flatheads use
the stairs for coming down and going up. If there was a
solid stone wall to keep them from reaching the plain
they would themselves be imprisoned by the wall. So
they had to leave some place to get around the wall,
and, if the wall was visible, all strangers or enemies
would find the place to go around it and then the wall
would be useless. So the Flatheads cunningly made their
wall invisible, believing that everyone who saw the
entrance to the mountain would walk straight toward it,
as we did, and find it impossible to go any farther. I
suppose the wall is really high and thick, and can't be
broken through, so those who find it in their way are
obliged to go away again."

"Well," said Dorothy, "if there's a way around the
wall, where is it?"

"We must find it," returned Ozma, and began feeling
her way along the wall. Dorothy followed and began to
get discouraged when Ozma had walked nearly a quarter
of a mile away from the entrance. But now the invisible
wall curved in toward the side of the mountain and
suddenly ended, leaving just space enough between the
wall and the mountain for an ordinary person to pass
through.

The girls went in, single file, and Ozma explained
that they were now behind the barrier and could go
back to the entrance. They met no further obstructions.

"Most people, Ozma, wouldn't have figured this thing
out the way you did," remarked Dorothy. "If I'd been
alone the invisible wall surely would have stumped me."

Reaching the entrance they began to mount the stone
stairs. They went up ten stairs and then down five
stairs, following a passage cut from the rock. The
stairs were just wide enough for the two girls to walk
abreast, arm in arm. At the bottom of the five stairs
the passage turned to the right, and they ascended ten
more stairs, only to find at the top of the flight five
stairs leading straight down again. Again the passage
turned abruptly, this time to the left, and ten more
stairs led upward.

The passage was now quite dark, for they were in the
heart of the mountain and all daylight had been shut
out by the turns of the passage. However, Ozma drew her
silver wand from her bosom and the great jewel at its
end gave out a lustrous, green-tinted light which
lighted the place well enough for them to see their way
plainly.

Ten steps up, five steps down, and a turn, this way
or that. That was the program, and Dorothy figured that
they were only gaining five stairs upward each trip
that they made.

"Those Flatheads must be funny people," she said to
Ozma. "They don't seem to do anything in a bold
straightforward manner. In making this passage they
forced everyone to walk three times as far as is
necessary. And of course this trip is just as tiresome
to the Flatheads as it is to other folks."

"That is true," answered Ozma; "yet it is a clever
arrangement to prevent their being surprised by
intruders. Every time we reach the tenth step of a
flight, the pressure of our feet on the stone makes a
bell ring on top of the mountain, to warn the Flatheads
of our coming."

"How do you know that?" demanded Dorothy, astonished.

"I've heard the bell ever since we started," Ozma
told her. "You could not hear it, I know, but when I am
holding my wand in my hand I can hear sounds a great
distance off."

"Do you hear anything on top of the mountain 'cept
the bell?" inquired Dorothy

"Yes. The people are calling to one another in alarm
and many footsteps are approaching the place where we
will reach the flat top of the mountain."

This made Dorothy feel somewhat anxious. "I'd thought
we were going to visit just common, ordinary people,"
she remarked, "but they're pretty clever, it seems, and
they know some kinds of magic, too. They may be
dangerous, Ozma. P'raps we'd better stayed at home."

Finally the upstairs-and-downstairs passage seemed
coming to an end, for daylight again appeared ahead of
the two girls and Ozma replaced her wand in the bosom
of her gown. The last ten steps brought them to the
surface, where they found themselves surrounded by
such a throng of queer people that for a time they
halted, speechless, and stared into the faces that
confronted them.

Dorothy knew at once why these mountain people were
called Flatheads. Their heads were really flat on top,
as if they had been cut off just above the eyes and
ears. Also the heads were bald, with no hair on top at
all, and the ears were big and stuck straight out, and
the noses were small and stubby, while the mouths of
the Flatheads were well shaped and not unusual. Their
eyes were perhaps their best feature, being large and
bright and a deep violet in color.

The costumes of the Flatheads were all made of metals
dug from their mountain. Small gold, silver, tin and
iron discs, about the size of pennies, and very thin,
were cleverly wired together and made to form knee
trousers and jackets for the men and skirts and waists
for the women. The colored metals were skillfully mixed
to form stripes and checks of various sorts, so that
the costumes were quite gorgeous and reminded Dorothy
of pictures she had seen of Knights of old clothed
armor.

Aside from their flat heads, these people were not
really bad looking. The men were armed with bows and
arrows and had small axes of steel stuck in their metal
belts. They wore no hats nor ornaments.




Chapter Six

Flathead Mountain



When they saw that the intruders on their mountain
were only two little girls, the Flatheads grunted with
satisfaction and drew back, permitting them to see what
the mountain top looked like. It was shaped like a
saucer, so that the houses and other buildings -- all
made of rocks -- could not be seen over the edge by
anyone standing in the plain below.

But now a big fat Flathead stood before the girls and
in a gruff voice demanded:

"What are you doing here? Have the Skeezers sent you
to spy upon us?"

"I am Princess Ozma, Ruler of all the Land of Oz."

"Well, I've never heard of the Land of Oz, so you may
be what you claim," returned the Flathead.

"This is the Land of Oz -- part of it, anyway,"
exclaimed Dorothy. "So Princess Ozma rules you Flathead
people, as well as all the other people in Oz."

The man laughed, and all the others who stood around
laughed, too. Some one in the crowd called:

"She'd better not tell the Supreme Dictator about
ruling the Flatheads. Eh, friends?"

"No, indeed!" they all answered in positive tones.

"Who is your Supreme Dictator?" answered Ozma.

"I think I'll let him tell you that himself,"
answered the man who had first spoken. "You have broken
our laws by coming here; and whoever you are the
Supreme Dictator must fix your punishment. Come along
with me."

He started down a path and Ozma and Dorothy followed
him without protest, as they wanted to see the most
important person in this queer country. The houses they
passed seemed pleasant enough and each had a little
yard in which were flowers and vegetables. Walls of
rock separated the dwellings, and all the paths were
paved with smooth slabs of rock. This seemed their only
building material and they utilized it cleverly for
every purpose.

Directly in the center of the great saucer stood a
larger building which the Flathead informed the girls
was the palace of the Supreme Dictator. He led them
through an entrance hall into a big reception room,
where they sat upon stone benches and awaited the
coming of the Dictator. Pretty soon he entered from
another room -- a rather lean and rather old Flathead,
dressed much like the others of this strange race, and
only distinguished from them by the sly and cunning
expression of his face. He kept his eyes half closed
and looked through the slits of them at Ozma and
Dorothy, who rose to receive him.

"Are you the Supreme Dictator of the Flatheads?"
inquired Ozma.

"Yes, that's me," he said, rubbing his hands slowly
together. "My word is law. I'm the head of the
Flatheads on this flat headland."

"I am Princess Ozma of Oz, and I have come from the
Emerald City to --"

"Stop a minute," interrupted the Dictator, and turned
to the man who had brought the girls there. "Go away,
Dictator Felo Flathead!" he commanded. "Return to your
duty and guard the Stairway. I will look after these
strangers." The man bowed and departed, and Dorothy
asked wonderingly:

"Is he a Dictator, too?"

"Of course," was the answer. "Everybody here is a
dictator of something or other. They're all office
holders. That's what keeps them contented. But I'm the
Supreme Dictator of all, and I'm elected once a year.
This is a democracy, you know, where the people are
allowed to vote for their rulers. A good many others
would like to be Supreme Dictator, but as I made a law
that I am always to count the votes myself, I am always
elected."

"What is your name?" asked Ozma.

"I am called the Su-dic, which is short for Supreme
Dictator. I sent that man away because the moment you
mentioned Ozma of Oz, and the Emerald City, I knew who
you are. I suppose I'm the only Flathead that ever
heard of you, but that's because I have more brains
than the rest."

Dorothy was staring hard at the Su-dic.

"I don't see how you can have any brains at all," she
remarked, "because the part of your head is gone where
brains are kept."

"I don't blame you for thinking that," he said. "Once
the Flatheads had no brains because, as you say, there
is no upper part to their heads, to hold brains. But
long, long ago a band of fairies flew over this country
and made it all a fairyland, and when they came to the
Flatheads the fairies were sorry to find them all very
stupid and quite unable to think. So, as there was no
good place in their bodies in which to put brains the
Fairy Queen gave each one of us a nice can of brains to
carry in his pocket and that made us just as
intelligent as other people. See," he continued, "here
is one of the cans of brains the fairies gave us." He
took from a pocket a bright tin can having a pretty red
label on it which said: Concentrated Brains, Extra
Quality."

"And does every Flathead have the same kind of
brains?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes, they're all alike. Here's another can." From
another pocket he produced a second can of brains.

"Did the fairies give you a double supply?" inquired
Dorothy.

"No, but one of the Flatheads thought he wanted to be
the Su-dic and tried to get my people to rebel against
me, so I punished him by taking away his brains. One
day my wife scolded me severely, so I took away her can
of brains. She didn't like that and went out and robbed
several women of their brains. Then I made a law that
if anyone stole another's brains, or even tried to
borrow them, he would forfeit his own brains to the Su-
dic. So each one is content with his own canned brains
and my wife and I are the only ones on the mountain
with more than one can. I have three cans and that
makes me very clever -- so clever that I'm a good
Sorcerer, if I do say it myself. My poor wife had four
cans of brains and became a remarkable witch, but alas!
that was before those terrible enemies, the Skeezers,
transformed her into a Golden Pig."

"Good gracious!" cried Dorothy; "is your wife really
a Golden Pig?"

"She is. The Skeezers did it and so I have declared
war on them. In revenge for making my wife a Pig I
intend to ruin their Magic Island and make the Skeezers
the slaves of the Flatheads!"

The Su-dic was very angry now; his eyes flashed and
his face took on a wicked and fierce expression. But
Ozma said to him, very sweetly and in a friendly voice:

"I am sorry to hear this. Will you please tell me
more about your troubles with the Skeezers? Then
perhaps I can help you."

She was only a girl, but there was dignity in her
pose and speech which impressed the Su-dic.

"If you are really Princess Ozma of Oz," the Flathead
said, "you are one of that band of fairies who, under
Queen Lurline, made all Oz a Fairyland. I have heard
that Lurline left one of her own fairies to rule Oz,
and gave the fairy the name of Ozma."

"If you knew this why did you not come to me at the
Emerald City and tender me your loyalty and obedience?"
asked the Ruler of Oz.

"Well, I only learned the fact lately, and I've been
too busy to leave home," he explained, looking at the
floor instead of into Ozma's eyes. She knew he had
spoken a falsehood, but only said:

"Why did you quarrel with the Skeezers?"

"It was this way," began the Su-dic, glad to change
the subject. "We Flatheads love fish, and as we have no
fish on this mountain we would sometimes go to the Lake
of the Skeezers to catch fish. This made the Skeezers
angry, for they declared the fish in their lake
belonged to them and were under their protection and
they forbade us to catch them. That was very mean and
unfriendly in the Skeezers, you must admit, and when we
paid no attention to their orders they set a guard on
the shore of the lake to prevent our fishing.

"Now, my wife, Rora Flathead, having four cans of
brains, had become a wonderful witch, and fish being
brain food, she loved to eat fish better than any one
of us. So she vowed she would destroy every fish in the
lake, unless the Skeezers let us catch what we wanted.
They defied us, so Rora prepared a kettleful of magic
poison and went down to the lake one night to dump it
all in the water and poison the fish. It was a clever
idea, quite worthy of my dear wife, but the Skeezer
Queen -- a young lady named Coo-ee-oh -- hid on the
bank of the lake and taking Rora unawares, transformed
her into a Golden Pig. The poison was spilled on the
ground and wicked Queen Coo-ee-oh, not content with her
cruel transformation, even took away my wife's four
cans of brains, so she is now a common grunting pig
without even brains enough to know her own name."

"Then," said Ozma thoughtfully, "the Queen of the
Skeezers must be a Sorceress."

"Yes," said the Su-dic, "but she doesn't know much
magic, after all. She is not as powerful as Rora
Flathead was, nor half as powerful as I am now, as
Queen Coo-ee-oh will discover when we fight our great
battle and destroy her."

"The Golden Pig can't be a witch any more, of
course," observed Dorothy.

"No; even had Queen Coo-ee-oh left her the four cans
of brains, poor Rora, in a pig's shape, couldn't do any
witchcraft. A witch has to use her fingers, and a pig
has only cloven hoofs."

"It seems a sad story," was Ozma's comment, "and all
the trouble arose because the Flatheads wanted fish
that did not belong to them."

"As for that," said the Su-dic, again angry, "I made
a law that any of my people could catch fish in the
Lake of the Skeezers, whenever they wanted to. So the
trouble was through the Skeezers defying my law."

"You can only make laws to govern your own people,"
asserted Ozma sternly. "I, alone, am empowered to make
laws that must be obeyed by all the peoples of Oz."

"Pooh!" cried the Su-dic scornfully. "You can't make
me obey your laws, I assure you. I know the extent of
your powers, Princess Ozma of Oz, and I know that I am
more powerful than you are. To prove it I shall keep
you and your companion prisoners in this mountain until
after we have fought and conquered the Skeezers. Then,
if you promise to be good, I may let you go home
again."

Dorothy was amazed by this effrontery and defiance of
the beautiful girl Ruler of Oz, whom all until now had
obeyed without question. But Ozma, still unruffled and
dignified, looked at the Su-dic and said:

"You did not mean that. You are angry and speak
unwisely, without reflection. I came here from my
palace in the Emerald City to prevent war and to make
peace between you and the Skeezers. I do not approve of
Queen Coo-ee-oh's action in transforming your wife Rora
into a pig, nor do I approve of Rora's cruel attempt to
poison the fishes in the lake. No one has the right to
work magic in my dominions without my consent, so the
Flatheads and the Skeezers have both broken my laws --
which must be obeyed."

"If you want to make peace," said the Su-dic, "make
the Skeezers restore my wife to her proper form and
give back her four cans of brains. Also make them agree
to allow us to catch fish in their lake."

"No," returned Ozma, "I will not do that, for it
would be unjust. I will have the Golden Pig again
transformed into your wife Rora, and give her one can
of brains, but the other three cans must be restored to
those she robbed. Neither may you catch fish in the
Lake of the Skeezers, for it is their lake and the fish
belong to them. This arrangement is just and honorable,
and you must agree to it."

"Never!" cried the Su-dic. Just then a pig came
running into the room, uttering dismal grunts. It was
made of solid gold, with joints at the bends of the
legs and in the neck and jaws. The Golden Pig's eyes
were rubies, and its teeth were polished ivory.

"There!" said the Su-dic, "gaze on the evil work of
Queen Coo-ee-oh, and then say if you can prevent my
making war on the Skeezers. That grunting beast was
once my wife -- the most beautiful Flathead on our
mountain and a skillful witch. Now look at her!"

"Fight the Skeezers, fight the Skeezers, fight the
Skeezers!" grunted the Golden Pig.

"I will fight the Skeezers," exclaimed the Flathead
chief, "and if a dozen Ozmas of Oz forbade me I would
fight just the same."

"Not if I can prevent it!" asserted Ozma.

"You can't prevent it. But since you threaten me,
I'll have you confined in the bronze prison until the
war is over," said the Su-dic. He whistled and four
stout Flatheads, armed with axes and spears, entered
the room and saluted him. Turning to the men he said:
"Take these two girls, bind them with wire ropes and
cast them into the bronze prison."

The four men bowed low and one of them asked:

"Where are the two girls, most noble Su-dic?"

The Su-dic turned to where Ozma and Dorothy had stood
but they had vanished!




Chapter Seven

The Magic Isle



Ozma, seeing it was useless to argue with the Supreme
Dictator of the Flatheads. had been considering how
best to escape from his power. She realized that his
sorcery might be difficult to overcome, and when he
threatened to cast Dorothy and her into a bronze prison
she slipped her hand into her bosom and grasped her
silver wand. With the other hand she grasped the hand
of Dorothy, but these motions were so natural that the
Su-dic did not notice them. Then when he turned to meet
his four soldiers, Ozma instantly rendered both herself
and Dorothy invisible and swiftly led her companion
around the group of Flatheads and out of the room. As
they reached the entry and descended the stone steps,
Ozma whispered:

"Let us run, dear! We are invisible, so no one will
see us."

Dorothy understood and she was a good runner. Ozma
had marked the place where the grand stairway that led
to the plain was located, so they made directly for it.
Some people were in the paths but these they dodged
around. One or two Flatheads heard the pattering of
footsteps of the girls on the stone pavement and
stopped with bewildered looks to gaze around them, but
no one interfered with the invisible fugitives.

The Su-dic had lost no time in starting the chase. He
and his men ran so fast that they might have overtaken
the girls before they reached the stairway had not the
Golden Pig suddenly run across their path. The Su-dic
tripped over the pig and fell flat, and his four men
tripped over him and tumbled in a heap. Before they
could scramble up and reach the mouth of the passage it
was too late to stop the two girls.

There was a guard on each side of the stairway, but
of course they did not see Ozma and Dorothy as they
sped past and descended the steps. Then they had to go
up five steps and down another ten, and so on, in the
same manner in which they had climbed to the top of the
mountain. Ozma lighted their way with her wand and they
kept on without relaxing their speed until they reached
the bottom. Then they ran to the right and turned the
corner of the invisible wall just as the Su-dic and his
followers rushed out of the arched entrance and looked
around in an attempt to discover the fugitives.

Ozma now knew they were safe, so she told Dorothy to
stop and both of them sat down on the grass until they
could breathe freely and become rested from their mad
flight.

As for the Su-dic, he realized he was foiled and soon
turned and climbed his stairs again. He was very angry
-- angry with Ozma and angry with himself -- because,
now that he took time to think, he remembered that he
knew very well the art of making people invisible, and
visible again, and if he had only thought of it in time
he could have used his magic knowledge to make the
girls visible and so have captured them easily.
However, it was now too late for regrets and he
determined to make preparations at once to march all
his forces against the Skeezers.

"What shall we do next?" asked Dorothy, when they
were rested.

"Let us find the Lake of the Skeezers," replied Ozma.
"From what that dreadful Su-dic said I imagine the
Skeezers are good people and worthy of our friendship,
and if we go to them we may help them to defeat the
Flatheads."

"I s'pose we can't stop the war now," remarked
Dorothy reflectively, as they walked toward the row of
palm trees.

"No; the Su-dic is determined to fight the Skeezers,
so all we can do is to warn them of their danger and
help them as much as possible."

"Of course you'll punish the Flatheads," said
Dorothy.

"Well, I do not think the Flathead people are as much
to blame as their Supreme Dictator," was the answer.
"If he is removed from power and his unlawful magic
taken from him, the people will probably be good and
respect the laws of the Land of Oz, and live at peace
with all their neighbors in the future."

"I hope so," said Dorothy with a sigh of doubt

The palms were not far from the mountain and the
girls reached them after a brisk walk. The huge trees
were set close together, in three rows, and had been
planted so as to keep people from passing them, but the
Flatheads had cut a passage through this barrier and
Ozma found the path and led Dorothy to the other side.

Beyond the palms they discovered a very beautiful
scene. Bordered by a green lawn was a great lake fully
a mile from shore to shore, the waters of which were
exquisitely blue and sparkling, with little wavelets
breaking its smooth surface where the breezes touched
it. In the center of this lake appeared a lovely
island, not of great extent but almost entirely covered
by a huge round building with glass walls and a high
glass dome which glittered brilliantly in the sunshine.
Between the glass building and the edge of the island
was no grass, flowers or shrubbery, but only an expanse
of highly polished white marble. There were no boats on
either shore and no signs of life could be seen
anywhere on the island.

"Well," said Dorothy, gazing wistfully at the island,
we've found the Lake of the Skeezers and their Magic
Isle. I guess the Skeezers are in that big glass
palace, but we can't get at 'em."




Chapter Eight

Queen Coo-ee-oh



Princess Ozma considered the situation gravely. Then
she tied her handkerchief to her wand and, standing at
the water's edge, waved the handkerchief like a flag,
as a signal. For a time they could observe no response.

"I don't see what good that will do," said Dorothy.
"Even if the Skeezers are on that island and see us,
and know we're friends, they haven't any boats to come
and get us."

But the Skeezers didn't need boats, as the girls soon
discovered. For on a sudden an opening appeared at the
base of the palace and from the opening came a slender
shaft of steel, reaching out slowly but steadily across
the water in the direction of the place where they
stood. To the girls this steel arrangement looked like
a triangle, with the base nearest the water. It came
toward them in the form of an arch, stretching out from
the palace wall until its end reached the bank and
rested there, while the other end still remained on the
island.

Then they saw that it was a bridge, consisting of a
steel footway just broad enough to walk on, and two
slender guide rails, one on either side, which were
connected with the footway by steel bars. The bridge
looked rather frail and Dorothy feared it would not
bear their weight, but Ozma at once called, "Come on!"
and started to walk across, holding fast to the rail on
either side. So Dorothy summoned her courage and
followed after. Before Ozma had taken three steps she
halted and so forced Dorothy to halt, for the bridge
was again moving and returning to the island.

"We need not walk after all," said Ozma. So they
stood still in their places and let the steel bridge
draw them onward. Indeed, the bridge drew them well
into the glass-domed building which covered the island,
and soon they found themselves standing in a marble
room where two handsomely dressed young men stood on a
platform to receive them.

Ozma at once stepped from the end of the bridge to
the marble platform, followed by Dorothy, and then the
bridge disappeared with a slight clang of steel and a
marble slab covered the opening from which it had
emerged.

The two young men bowed profoundly to Ozma, and one
of them said:

"Queen Coo-ee-oh bids you welcome, O Strangers. Her
Majesty is waiting to receive you in her palace."

"Lead on," replied Ozma with dignity.

But instead of "leading on," the platform of marble
began to rise, carrying them upward through a square
hole above which just fitted it. A moment later they
found themselves within the great glass dome that
covered almost all of the island.

Within this dome was a little village, with houses,
streets, gardens and parks. The houses were of colored
marbles, prettily designed, with many stained-glass
windows, and the streets and gardens seemed well cared
for. Exactly under the center of the lofty dome was a
small park filled with brilliant flowers, with an
elaborate fountain, and facing this park stood a
building larger and more imposing than the others.
Toward this building the young men escorted Ozma and
Dorothy.

On the streets and in the doorways or open windows of
the houses were men, women and children, all richly
dressed. These were much like other people in different
parts of the Land of Oz, except that instead of seeming
merry and contented they all wore expressions of much
solemnity or of nervous irritation. They had beautiful
homes, splendid clothes, and ample food, but Dorothy at
once decided something was wrong with their lives and
that they were not happy. She said nothing, however,
but looked curiously at the Skeezers.

At the entrance of the palace Ozma and Dorothy were
met by two other young men, in uniform and armed with
queer weapons that seemed about halfway between pistols
and guns, but were like neither. Their conductors bowed
and left them, and the two in uniforms led the girls
into the palace.

In a beautiful throne room, surrounded by a dozen or
more young men and women, sat the Queen of the
Skeezers, Coo-ee-oh. She was a girl who looked older
than Ozma or Dorothy -- fifteen or sixteen, at least --
and although she was elaborately dressed as if she were
going to a ball she was too thin and plain of feature
to be pretty. But evidently Queen Coo-ee-oh did not
realize this fact, for her air and manner betrayed her
as proud and haughty and with a high regard for her own
importance. Dorothy at once decided she was "snippy"
and that she would not like Queen Coo-ee-oh as a
companion.

The Queen's hair was as black as her skin was white
and her eyes were black, too. The eyes, as she calmly
examined Ozma and Dorothy, had a suspicious and
unfriendly look in them, but she said quietly:

"I know who you are, for I have consulted my Magic
Oracle, which told me that one calls herself Princess
Ozma, the Ruler of all the Land of Oz, and the other is
Princess Dorothy of Oz, who came from a country called
Kansas. I know nothing of the Land of Oz, and I know
nothing of Kansas."

"Why, this is the Land of Oz!" cried Dorothy. "It's a
part of the Land of Oz, anyhow, whether you know it or
not."

"Oh, in-deed!" answered Queen Coo-ee-oh, scornfully.
"I suppose you will claim next that this Princess Ozma,
ruling the Land of Oz, rules me!"

"Of course," returned Dorothy. "There's no doubt of
it."

The Queen turned to Ozma.

"Do you dare make such a claim?" she asked.

By this time Ozma had made up her mind as to the
character of this haughty and disdainful creature,
whose self-pride evidently led her to believe herself
superior to all others.

"I did not come here to quarrel with your Majesty,"
said the girl Ruler of Oz, quietly. "What and who I am
is well established, and my authority comes from the
Fairy Queen Lurline, of whose band I was a member when
Lurline made all Oz a Fairyland. There are several
countries and several different peoples in this broad
land, each of which has its separate rulers, Kings,
Emperors and Queens. But all these render obedience to
my laws and acknowledge me as the supreme Ruler."

"If other Kings and Queens are fools that does not
interest me in the least," replied Coo-ee-oh,
disdainfully. "In the Land of the Skeezers I alone am
supreme. You are impudent to think I would defer to you
-- or to anyone else."

"Let us not speak of this now, please," answered
Ozma. "Your island is in danger, for a powerful foe is
preparing to destroy it."

"Pah! The Flatheads. I do not fear them."

"Their Supreme Dictator is a Sorcerer."

"My magic is greater than his. Let the Flatheads
come! They will never return to their barren mountain-
top. I will see to that."

Ozma did not like this attitude, for it meant that
the Skeezers were eager to fight the Flatheads, and
Ozma's object in coming here was to prevent fighting
and induce the two quarrelsome neighbors to make peace.
She was also greatly disappointed in Coo-ee-oh, for the
reports of Su-dic had led her to imagine the Queen more
just and honorable than were the Flatheads. Indeed Ozma
reflected that the girl might be better at heart than
her self-pride and overbearing manner indicated, and in
any event it would be wise not to antagonize her but to
try to win her friendship.

"I do not like wars, your Majesty," said Ozma. "In
the Emerald City, where I rule thousands of people, and
in the countries near to the Emerald City, where
thousands more acknowledge my rule, there is no army at
all, because there is no quarreling and no need to
fight. If differences arise between my people, they
come to me and I judge the cases and award justice to
all. So, when I learned there might be war between two
faraway people of Oz, I came here to settle the dispute
and adjust the quarrel."

"No one asked you to come," declared Queen Coo-ee-oh.
"It is my business to settle this dispute, not yours.
You say my island is a part of the Land of Oz, which
you rule, but that is all nonsense, for I've never
heard of the Land of Oz, nor of you. You say you are a
fairy, and that fairies gave you command over me. I
don't believe it! What I do believe is that you are an
impostor and have come here to stir up trouble among my
people, who are already becoming difficult to manage.
You two girls may even be spies of the vile Flatheads,
for all I know, and may be trying to trick me. But
understand this," she added, proudly rising from her
jeweled throne to confront them, "I have magic powers
greater than any fairy possesses, and greater than any
Flathead possesses. I am a Krumbic Witch -- the only
Krumbic Witch in the world -- and I fear the magic of
no other creature that exists! You say you rule
thousands. I rule one hundred and one Skeezers. But
every one of them trembles at my word. Now that Ozma of
Oz and Princess Dorothy are here, I shall rule one
hundred and three subjects, for you also shall bow
before my power. More than that, in ruling you I also
rule the thousands you say you rule."

Dorothy was very indignant at this speech.

"I've got a pink kitten that sometimes talks like
that," she said, "but after I give her a good whipping
she doesn't think she's so high and mighty after all.
If you only knew who Ozma is you'd be scared to death
to talk to her like that!"

Queen Coo-ee-oh gave the girl a supercilious look.
Then she turned again to Ozma.

"I happen to know," said she, "that the Flatheads
intend to attack us tomorrow, but we are ready for
them. Until the battle is over, I shall keep you two
strangers prisoners on my island, from which there is
no chance for you to escape."

She turned and looked around the band of courtiers
who stood silently around her throne.

"Lady Aurex," she continued, singling out one of the
young women, "take these children to your house and
care for them, giving them food and lodging. You may
allow them to wander anywhere under the Great Dome, for
they are harmless. After I have attended to the
Flatheads I will consider what next to do with these
foolish girls."

She resumed her seat and the Lady Aurex bowed low and
said in a humble manner:

"I obey your Majesty's commands." Then to Ozma and
Dorothy she added, "Follow me," and turned to leave the
throne room.

Dorothy looked to see what Ozma would do. To her
surprise and a little to her disappointment Ozma turned
and followed Lady Aurex. So Dorothy trailed after them,
but not without giving a parting, haughty look toward
Queen Coo-ee-oh, who had her face turned the other way
and did not see the disapproving look




Chapter Nine

Lady Aurex



Lady Aurex led Ozma and Dorothy along a street to a
pretty marble house near to one edge of the great glass
dome that covered the village. She did not speak to the
